CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Stoolap

Thank you for your interest in contributing to Stoolap! This document provides guidelines and information about the contribution process.

## Code of Conduct

By participating in this project, you agree to uphold our Code of Conduct (to be added).

## License Information

Stoolap is licensed under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](LICENSE). By contributing to Stoolap, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the same license.

### What this means for contributors

1. **Contribution Licensing**: All contributions you submit will be under the Apache License 2.0. If you submit code that is not your original work, please identify its source and confirm it's compatible with the Apache License 2.0.

2. **Contributor License Agreement (CLA)**: We currently do not require a formal CLA, but by submitting a contribution, you are agreeing that your work will be licensed under the project's Apache License 2.0.

3. **Patent Rights**: The Apache License 2.0 includes an express grant of patent rights from contributors to users. Be aware of this when contributing patented intellectual property.

4. **Attribution Requirements**: You must retain all copyright, patent, trademark, and attribution notices from the source form of the work in any derivative works you distribute.

### License Headers

All source files in the project should include a license header:

```rust
// Copyright 2025 Stoolap Contributors
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
```

When creating new files, please include this header.

## Development Process

### Setting Up Your Development Environment

1. Fork the repository on GitHub
2. Clone your fork locally:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/oxibase.git
   cd oxibase
   ```
3. Add the upstream repository as a remote:
   ```bash
   git remote add upstream https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase.git
   ```
4. Create a new branch for your feature or bugfix:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature-or-bugfix-name
   ```

### Building

```bash
# Debug build
cargo build

# Release build
cargo build --release

# Build with CLI features
cargo build --release --features cli
```

### Testing

Before submitting your changes, please run the tests:

```bash
# Run all tests
cargo test

# Run library tests only
cargo test --lib

# Run specific test
cargo test test_name

# Run tests with output
cargo test -- --nocapture
```

### Linting

Ensure your code passes clippy without warnings:

```bash
# Check library code
cargo clippy --lib

# Check all code
cargo clippy --all-targets
```

### Formatting

Format your code with rustfmt:

```bash
cargo fmt
```

### Submitting Changes

1. Commit your changes using clear commit messages that explain the problem you're solving and your approach
2. Push your branch to your fork
3. Open a pull request against the main repository's `main` branch

### Pull Request Process

1. Update the README.md or documentation with details of your changes, if applicable
2. Ensure all tests pass (`cargo test`)
3. Ensure clippy passes (`cargo clippy --lib`)
4. Your PR will be reviewed by maintainers, who may request changes
5. Once approved, your PR will be merged

## Coding Standards

- Follow Rust standard conventions and idioms
- Use `cargo fmt` for formatting
- Run `cargo clippy` and fix all warnings
- Keep functions small and focused
- Document public APIs with doc comments (`///`)
- Write tests for new functionality
- Avoid `unsafe` code unless absolutely necessary (and document why)
- Avoid `unwrap()` in library code - use proper error handling
- No `todo!()` or `unimplemented!()` in committed code

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── api/           # Public Database API
├── core/          # Core types (Value, Row, Schema, Error)
├── executor/      # Query execution engine
├── functions/     # Built-in functions (scalar, aggregate, window)
├── optimizer/     # Cost-based query optimizer
├── parser/        # SQL parser (lexer, AST, parser)
├── storage/       # Storage engine and MVCC
└── bin/           # CLI binary
```

## Additional Resources

- [The Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/)
- [Rust API Guidelines](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/)
- [Apache License 2.0 Explained](https://tldrlegal.com/license/apache-license-2.0-(apache-2.0))

Thank you for contributing to Stoolap!

Commit message:

feat: rebrand project from stoolap to oxibase
- Rename package name, library, and binary from stoolap to oxibase
- Update all source code imports and references across src/, tests/, examples/
- Modify CLI output, help text, version strings, and command names
- Update documentation, README, CONTRIBUTING, and website configs
- Change repository URLs, homepage, and documentation links
- Preserve original copyrights, append "Copyright 2025 OxiBase Contributors"
- Update test data entries and example outputs
- Refresh Cargo.lock with new package metadata
- Ensure all builds and tests pass post-rebrand

This completes the full project rebranding while maintaining functionality and respecting copyright preservation requirements.

Signed-off-by: Gabriel de Maeztu <gabriel.maeztu@gmail.com>

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to OxiBase

Thank you for your interest in contributing to OxiBase! This document provides guidelines and information about the contribution process.

## Code of Conduct

By participating in this project, you agree to uphold our Code of Conduct (to be added).

## License Information

OxiBase is licensed under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](LICENSE). By contributing to OxiBase, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the same license.

### What this means for contributors

1. **Contribution Licensing**: All contributions you submit will be under the Apache License 2.0. If you submit code that is not your original work, please identify its source and confirm it's compatible with the Apache License 2.0.

2. **Contributor License Agreement (CLA)**: We currently do not require a formal CLA, but by submitting a contribution, you are agreeing that your work will be licensed under the project's Apache License 2.0.

3. **Patent Rights**: The Apache License 2.0 includes an express grant of patent rights from contributors to users. Be aware of this when contributing patented intellectual property.

4. **Attribution Requirements**: You must retain all copyright, patent, trademark, and attribution notices from the source form of the work in any derivative works you distribute.

### License Headers

All source files in the project should include a license header:

```rust
// Copyright 2025 Stoolap Contributors
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
```

When creating new files, please include this header.

## Development Process

### Setting Up Your Development Environment

1. Fork the repository on GitHub
2. Clone your fork locally:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/oxibase.git
   cd oxibase
   ```
3. Add the upstream repository as a remote:
   ```bash
   git remote add upstream https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase.git
   ```
4. Create a new branch for your feature or bugfix:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature-or-bugfix-name
   ```

### Building

```bash
# Debug build
cargo build

# Release build
cargo build --release

# Build with CLI features
cargo build --release --features cli
```

### Testing

Before submitting your changes, please run the tests:

```bash
# Run all tests
cargo test

# Run library tests only
cargo test --lib

# Run specific test
cargo test test_name

# Run tests with output
cargo test -- --nocapture
```

### Linting

Ensure your code passes clippy without warnings:

```bash
# Check library code
cargo clippy --lib

# Check all code
cargo clippy --all-targets
```

### Formatting

Format your code with rustfmt:

```bash
cargo fmt
```

### Submitting Changes

1. Commit your changes using clear commit messages that explain the problem you're solving and your approach
2. Push your branch to your fork
3. Open a pull request against the main repository's `main` branch

### Pull Request Process

1. Update the README.md or documentation with details of your changes, if applicable
2. Ensure all tests pass (`cargo test`)
3. Ensure clippy passes (`cargo clippy --lib`)
4. Your PR will be reviewed by maintainers, who may request changes
5. Once approved, your PR will be merged

## Coding Standards

- Follow Rust standard conventions and idioms
- Use `cargo fmt` for formatting
- Run `cargo clippy` and fix all warnings
- Keep functions small and focused
- Document public APIs with doc comments (`///`)
- Write tests for new functionality
- Avoid `unsafe` code unless absolutely necessary (and document why)
- Avoid `unwrap()` in library code - use proper error handling
- No `todo!()` or `unimplemented!()` in committed code

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── api/           # Public Database API
├── core/          # Core types (Value, Row, Schema, Error)
├── executor/      # Query execution engine
├── functions/     # Built-in functions (scalar, aggregate, window)
├── optimizer/     # Cost-based query optimizer
├── parser/        # SQL parser (lexer, AST, parser)
├── storage/       # Storage engine and MVCC
└── bin/           # CLI binary
```

## Additional Resources

- [The Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/)
- [Rust API Guidelines](https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/)
- [Apache License 2.0 Explained](https://tldrlegal.com/license/apache-license-2.0-(apache-2.0))

Thank you for contributing to OxiBase!
