docs/_docs/index.md, before:

---
title: Documentation
layout: doc
---

# Stoolap Documentation

Welcome to the Stoolap Documentation! This is your comprehensive guide to using and understanding Stoolap, a high-performance embedded SQL database written in pure Rust.

## What is Stoolap?

Stoolap is a modern embedded SQL database that provides full ACID transactions with MVCC, a sophisticated cost-based query optimizer, and features that rival established databases like PostgreSQL and DuckDB. Built entirely in Rust with minimal unsafe code (only for FFI and performance-critical hot paths), Stoolap features:

- **Multiple Index Types**: B-tree, Hash, and Bitmap indexes with automatic type selection
- **Multi-Column Indexes**: Composite indexes for complex query patterns
- **Parallel Query Execution**: Automatic parallelization using Rayon for large datasets
- **Cost-Based Optimizer**: PostgreSQL-style optimizer with adaptive execution and cardinality feedback
- **Semantic Query Caching**: Intelligent result caching with predicate subsumption
- **Disk Persistence**: WAL and snapshots with crash recovery
- **Rich SQL Support**: Window functions, CTEs (including recursive), subqueries, ROLLUP/CUBE, and 101+ built-in functions

## Documentation Sections

{% for category in site.data.doc_categories %}
{% assign category_docs = site.docs | where: "category", category.name | sort: "order" %}
{% if category_docs.size > 0 %}
### {{ category.name }}
{% for doc in category_docs %}
* [{{ doc.title }}]({{ doc.url | relative_url }})
{% endfor %}
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}

## Need Help?

If you can't find what you're looking for in the documentation, you can:
* [Open an issue](https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase/issues) on GitHub
* [Join the discussions](https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase/discussions) to ask questions

---

This documentation is under active development. Contributions are welcome!

Commit message:

feat: rebrand project from stoolap to oxibase
- Rename package name, library, and binary from stoolap to oxibase
- Update all source code imports and references across src/, tests/, examples/
- Modify CLI output, help text, version strings, and command names
- Update documentation, README, CONTRIBUTING, and website configs
- Change repository URLs, homepage, and documentation links
- Preserve original copyrights, append "Copyright 2025 OxiBase Contributors"
- Update test data entries and example outputs
- Refresh Cargo.lock with new package metadata
- Ensure all builds and tests pass post-rebrand

This completes the full project rebranding while maintaining functionality and respecting copyright preservation requirements.

Signed-off-by: Gabriel de Maeztu <gabriel.maeztu@gmail.com>

docs/_docs/index.md, after:

---
title: Documentation
layout: doc
---

# OxiBase Documentation

Welcome to the OxiBase Documentation! This is your comprehensive guide to using and understanding OxiBase, a high-performance embedded SQL database written in pure Rust.

## What is OxiBase?

OxiBase is a modern embedded SQL database that provides full ACID transactions with MVCC, a sophisticated cost-based query optimizer, and features that rival established databases like PostgreSQL and DuckDB. Built entirely in Rust with minimal unsafe code (only for FFI and performance-critical hot paths), OxiBase features:

- **Multiple Index Types**: B-tree, Hash, and Bitmap indexes with automatic type selection
- **Multi-Column Indexes**: Composite indexes for complex query patterns
- **Parallel Query Execution**: Automatic parallelization using Rayon for large datasets
- **Cost-Based Optimizer**: PostgreSQL-style optimizer with adaptive execution and cardinality feedback
- **Semantic Query Caching**: Intelligent result caching with predicate subsumption
- **Disk Persistence**: WAL and snapshots with crash recovery
- **Rich SQL Support**: Window functions, CTEs (including recursive), subqueries, ROLLUP/CUBE, and 101+ built-in functions

## Documentation Sections

{% for category in site.data.doc_categories %}
{% assign category_docs = site.docs | where: "category", category.name | sort: "order" %}
{% if category_docs.size > 0 %}
### {{ category.name }}
{% for doc in category_docs %}
* [{{ doc.title }}]({{ doc.url | relative_url }})
{% endfor %}
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}

## Need Help?

If you can't find what you're looking for in the documentation, you can:
* [Open an issue](https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase/issues) on GitHub
* [Join the discussions](https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase/discussions) to ask questions

---

This documentation is under active development. Contributions are welcome!
