docs/_docs/architecture/expression-pushdown.md, before:

---
layout: doc
title: Expression Pushdown
category: Architecture
order: 6
---

# Expression Pushdown

This document explains Stoolap's expression pushdown optimization, which moves filtering operations closer to the data to improve query performance.

## What is Expression Pushdown?

Expression pushdown is a query optimization technique that "pushes" filter expressions (typically from WHERE clauses) down to the lowest possible level in the query execution stack. This minimizes the amount of data that needs to be processed at higher levels of the execution engine.

## Benefits of Expression Pushdown

### Performance Improvements

- **Reduced Data Processing** - Filter data early to avoid unnecessary processing
- **Reduced Memory Usage** - Process only relevant data
- **Improved Cache Efficiency** - Better CPU cache utilization with smaller data sets
- **Optimized I/O** - Less data loaded from storage
- **Improved Parallelism** - Filter operations can be parallelized at lower levels

### Measurable Impacts

Depending on the query, expression pushdown can provide:

- 10-100x reduction in processed data volume
- 2-10x improvement in query execution time
- Significant memory usage reduction

## How Expression Pushdown Works in Stoolap

### Pushdown Levels

Stoolap implements expression pushdown at multiple levels:

1. **Storage Level Pushdown** - Expressions pushed directly to storage
2. **Index Level Pushdown** - Expressions leveraging indexes (B-tree, Hash, Bitmap)
3. **Scan Level Pushdown** - Expressions applied during table scanning
4. **Join Level Pushdown** - Expressions pushed before or into joins

**Note**: Subquery pushdown is not yet implemented.

### The Pushdown Process

When processing a query with filtering conditions:

1. The SQL parser creates an abstract syntax tree (AST)
2. The query analyzer examines filter expressions
3. Pushdown eligibility is determined for each expression
4. Expressions are transformed into a format suitable for lower levels
5. Execution plans are modified to incorporate pushed-down expressions
6. The storage engine applies filters directly when possible

## Expression Types

Not all expressions can be pushed down. Stoolap categorizes expressions by pushdown eligibility:

### Fully Pushable Expressions

These expressions can be pushed all the way to the storage layer:

- **Simple Comparisons** - Equality (=), inequality (!=, <>), greater/less than (>, <, >=, <=)
- **Range Conditions** - BETWEEN, IN
- **Null Checks** - IS NULL, IS NOT NULL
- **String Patterns** - LIKE (with limitations)
- **Logical Operations** - AND, OR, NOT

```sql
-- All filters can be pushed down to storage
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE 
    status = 'shipped' AND 
    order_date BETWEEN '2022-01-01' AND '2022-12-31' AND
    customer_id IN (1, 2, 3);
```

### Partially Pushable Expressions

These expressions can be partially pushed down:

- **Simple Functions** - ABS(), LOWER(), UPPER()
- **Date/Time Functions** - DATE_TRUNC(), TIME_TRUNC()
- **Type Casts** - CAST()
- **Simple Arithmetic** - +, -, *, /

```sql
-- The date_trunc can be pushed down, making this more efficient
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE 
    DATE_TRUNC('month', order_date) = DATE_TRUNC('month', NOW());
```

### Non-Pushable Expressions

These typically cannot be pushed down:

- **Complex Functions** - User-defined functions, complex built-in functions
- **Aggregates** - SUM(), COUNT(), AVG() (though parts of the expression may be pushed)
- **Window Functions** - ROW_NUMBER(), RANK()
- **Subquery References** - Correlated subqueries

```sql
-- The aggregate function prevents full pushdown
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE 
    total > (SELECT AVG(total) FROM orders);
```

## Implementation Details

### Expression Translation

Expressions are translated from SQL syntax to storage-level predicates:

1. **Parser** - Parses SQL into an abstract syntax tree
2. **Analyzer** - Identifies pushable expressions
3. **Translator** - Converts SQL expressions to storage predicates
4. **Optimizer** - Determines optimal pushdown strategy
5. **Executor** - Applies the pushdown during execution

### Specialized Expression Types

Stoolap implements specialized expression types for efficient pushdown:

- **SimpleExpression** - Basic comparison operations
- **BetweenExpression** - Range checks
- **InListExpression** - Set membership tests
- **LogicalExpression** - Combining expressions with AND/OR
- **NullCheckExpression** - NULL checks
- **RangeExpression** - Optimized range queries
- **NotExpression** - Logical negation

These expression types are implemented in `src/storage/expression/`.

### Storage-Level Implementation

At the storage level, Stoolap implements optimized filtering:

- **Index-Based Filtering** - Filter operations using B-tree, Hash, and Bitmap indexes
- **Parallel Evaluation** - Multi-threaded predicate evaluation using Rayon
- **Bitmap Results** - Bitmap representation of matching positions
- **Efficient Traversal** - Row-based filtering with MVCC visibility checks

## Pushdown Strategies

### Filter Pushdown

Basic filter pushdown moves WHERE conditions down:

```sql
-- Before pushdown (conceptual)
Table Scan (orders) → Filter (status = 'shipped') → Project

-- After pushdown (conceptual)
Table Scan with Filter (orders, status = 'shipped') → Project
```

### Join Pushdown

Filters are pushed before or into joins:

```sql
-- Before pushdown (conceptual)
Table Scan (orders) → Join with customers → Filter (status = 'shipped')

-- After pushdown (conceptual)
Table Scan with Filter (orders, status = 'shipped') → Join with customers
```

### Index Utilization

Pushed-down expressions leverage indexes:

```sql
-- When an index exists on status, this becomes:
Index Scan (orders_status_idx, 'shipped') → Project
```

### Predicate Simplification

Expressions are simplified when possible:

```sql
-- Before simplification
WHERE age >= 18 AND age <= 65 AND age != 30

-- After simplification
WHERE age BETWEEN 18 AND 65 AND age != 30
```

## Performance Considerations

### When Pushdown Helps Most

Expression pushdown provides the greatest benefits when:

1. **High Selectivity** - Filters eliminate a large percentage of rows
2. **Early Filtering** - Filters can be applied before expensive operations
3. **Index Availability** - Filters can use available indexes
4. **Complex Queries** - Queries with joins, subqueries, or aggregations

### Potential Limitations

Some scenarios may limit pushdown benefits:

1. **Low Selectivity Filters** - If most rows match, pushdown may not help much
2. **Complex Expressions** - Not all expressions can be pushed down
3. **Function-Based Filters** - Functions on columns may prevent index usage

## Query Examples

### Simple Pushdown

```sql
-- Highly efficient: Pushes filter to storage and uses index if available
SELECT * FROM customers WHERE country = 'US';
```

### Multiple Filter Pushdown

```sql
-- All conditions are pushed down and combined at the storage level
SELECT * FROM orders 
WHERE status = 'shipped' 
  AND order_date > '2022-01-01' 
  AND total > 100;
```

### Join Pushdown

```sql
-- Filters are pushed before the join
SELECT c.name, o.order_date 
FROM customers c
JOIN orders o ON c.id = o.customer_id
WHERE c.country = 'US' AND o.status = 'shipped';
```

### Function Pushdown

```sql
-- LOWER function can be pushed down
SELECT * FROM products
WHERE LOWER(name) LIKE '%organic%';
```

## Implementation Details

Stoolap's expression pushdown is implemented in several components:

- **src/executor/query.rs** - High-level pushdown decisions
- **src/executor/planner.rs** - Query planning with pushdown
- **src/storage/expression/** - Specialized expression types
- **src/storage/mvcc/table.rs** - Storage-level filtering

## Best Practices

To maximize the benefits of expression pushdown:

1. **Use direct column references** - Avoid functions on indexed columns in WHERE clauses
2. **Create appropriate indexes** - Indexes enable better pushdown optimizations
3. **Use simple predicates** - Simple expressions are more likely to be pushed down
4. **Monitor query performance** - Use execution timing to verify optimization effectiveness
5. **Combine multiple conditions** - AND conditions can be pushed down effectively

## Advanced Techniques

### Custom Expressions

Stoolap allows for specialized expression types:

```sql
-- Range expressions are highly optimized
SELECT * FROM time_series 
WHERE timestamp BETWEEN '2022-01-01' AND '2022-01-31';
```

### Combined Index and Expression Pushdown

When expressions match available indexes:

```sql
-- With a composite index on (status, order_date), this is very efficient
SELECT * FROM orders 
WHERE status = 'shipped' AND order_date > '2022-01-01';
```

### Function Index Pushdown

When functions are used in filtering:

```sql
-- If an index exists on LOWER(email), this pushdown is efficient
SELECT * FROM users WHERE LOWER(email) = 'user@example.com';
```

Commit message:

feat: rebrand project from stoolap to oxibase
- Rename package name, library, and binary from stoolap to oxibase
- Update all source code imports and references across src/, tests/, examples/
- Modify CLI output, help text, version strings, and command names
- Update documentation, README, CONTRIBUTING, and website configs
- Change repository URLs, homepage, and documentation links
- Preserve original copyrights, append "Copyright 2025 OxiBase Contributors"
- Update test data entries and example outputs
- Refresh Cargo.lock with new package metadata
- Ensure all builds and tests pass post-rebrand

This completes the full project rebranding while maintaining functionality and respecting copyright preservation requirements.

Signed-off-by: Gabriel de Maeztu <gabriel.maeztu@gmail.com>

docs/_docs/architecture/expression-pushdown.md, after:

---
layout: doc
title: Expression Pushdown
category: Architecture
order: 6
---

# Expression Pushdown

This document explains OxiBase's expression pushdown optimization, which moves filtering operations closer to the data to improve query performance.

## What is Expression Pushdown?

Expression pushdown is a query optimization technique that "pushes" filter expressions (typically from WHERE clauses) down to the lowest possible level in the query execution stack. This minimizes the amount of data that needs to be processed at higher levels of the execution engine.

## Benefits of Expression Pushdown

### Performance Improvements

- **Reduced Data Processing** - Filter data early to avoid unnecessary processing
- **Reduced Memory Usage** - Process only relevant data
- **Improved Cache Efficiency** - Better CPU cache utilization with smaller data sets
- **Optimized I/O** - Less data loaded from storage
- **Improved Parallelism** - Filter operations can be parallelized at lower levels

### Measurable Impacts

Depending on the query, expression pushdown can provide:

- 10-100x reduction in processed data volume
- 2-10x improvement in query execution time
- Significant memory usage reduction

## How Expression Pushdown Works in OxiBase

### Pushdown Levels

OxiBase implements expression pushdown at multiple levels:

1. **Storage Level Pushdown** - Expressions pushed directly to storage
2. **Index Level Pushdown** - Expressions leveraging indexes (B-tree, Hash, Bitmap)
3. **Scan Level Pushdown** - Expressions applied during table scanning
4. **Join Level Pushdown** - Expressions pushed before or into joins

**Note**: Subquery pushdown is not yet implemented.

### The Pushdown Process

When processing a query with filtering conditions:

1. The SQL parser creates an abstract syntax tree (AST)
2. The query analyzer examines filter expressions
3. Pushdown eligibility is determined for each expression
4. Expressions are transformed into a format suitable for lower levels
5. Execution plans are modified to incorporate pushed-down expressions
6. The storage engine applies filters directly when possible

## Expression Types

Not all expressions can be pushed down. OxiBase categorizes expressions by pushdown eligibility:

### Fully Pushable Expressions

These expressions can be pushed all the way to the storage layer:

- **Simple Comparisons** - Equality (=), inequality (!=, <>), greater/less than (>, <, >=, <=)
- **Range Conditions** - BETWEEN, IN
- **Null Checks** - IS NULL, IS NOT NULL
- **String Patterns** - LIKE (with limitations)
- **Logical Operations** - AND, OR, NOT

```sql
-- All filters can be pushed down to storage
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE 
    status = 'shipped' AND 
    order_date BETWEEN '2022-01-01' AND '2022-12-31' AND
    customer_id IN (1, 2, 3);
```

### Partially Pushable Expressions

These expressions can be partially pushed down:

- **Simple Functions** - ABS(), LOWER(), UPPER()
- **Date/Time Functions** - DATE_TRUNC(), TIME_TRUNC()
- **Type Casts** - CAST()
- **Simple Arithmetic** - +, -, *, /

```sql
-- The date_trunc can be pushed down, making this more efficient
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE 
    DATE_TRUNC('month', order_date) = DATE_TRUNC('month', NOW());
```

### Non-Pushable Expressions

These typically cannot be pushed down:

- **Complex Functions** - User-defined functions, complex built-in functions
- **Aggregates** - SUM(), COUNT(), AVG() (though parts of the expression may be pushed)
- **Window Functions** - ROW_NUMBER(), RANK()
- **Subquery References** - Correlated subqueries

```sql
-- The aggregate function prevents full pushdown
SELECT * FROM orders WHERE 
    total > (SELECT AVG(total) FROM orders);
```

## Implementation Details

### Expression Translation

Expressions are translated from SQL syntax to storage-level predicates:

1. **Parser** - Parses SQL into an abstract syntax tree
2. **Analyzer** - Identifies pushable expressions
3. **Translator** - Converts SQL expressions to storage predicates
4. **Optimizer** - Determines optimal pushdown strategy
5. **Executor** - Applies the pushdown during execution

### Specialized Expression Types

OxiBase implements specialized expression types for efficient pushdown:

- **SimpleExpression** - Basic comparison operations
- **BetweenExpression** - Range checks
- **InListExpression** - Set membership tests
- **LogicalExpression** - Combining expressions with AND/OR
- **NullCheckExpression** - NULL checks
- **RangeExpression** - Optimized range queries
- **NotExpression** - Logical negation

These expression types are implemented in `src/storage/expression/`.

### Storage-Level Implementation

At the storage level, OxiBase implements optimized filtering:

- **Index-Based Filtering** - Filter operations using B-tree, Hash, and Bitmap indexes
- **Parallel Evaluation** - Multi-threaded predicate evaluation using Rayon
- **Bitmap Results** - Bitmap representation of matching positions
- **Efficient Traversal** - Row-based filtering with MVCC visibility checks

## Pushdown Strategies

### Filter Pushdown

Basic filter pushdown moves WHERE conditions down:

```sql
-- Before pushdown (conceptual)
Table Scan (orders) → Filter (status = 'shipped') → Project

-- After pushdown (conceptual)
Table Scan with Filter (orders, status = 'shipped') → Project
```

### Join Pushdown

Filters are pushed before or into joins:

```sql
-- Before pushdown (conceptual)
Table Scan (orders) → Join with customers → Filter (status = 'shipped')

-- After pushdown (conceptual)
Table Scan with Filter (orders, status = 'shipped') → Join with customers
```

### Index Utilization

Pushed-down expressions leverage indexes:

```sql
-- When an index exists on status, this becomes:
Index Scan (orders_status_idx, 'shipped') → Project
```

### Predicate Simplification

Expressions are simplified when possible:

```sql
-- Before simplification
WHERE age >= 18 AND age <= 65 AND age != 30

-- After simplification
WHERE age BETWEEN 18 AND 65 AND age != 30
```

## Performance Considerations

### When Pushdown Helps Most

Expression pushdown provides the greatest benefits when:

1. **High Selectivity** - Filters eliminate a large percentage of rows
2. **Early Filtering** - Filters can be applied before expensive operations
3. **Index Availability** - Filters can use available indexes
4. **Complex Queries** - Queries with joins, subqueries, or aggregations

### Potential Limitations

Some scenarios may limit pushdown benefits:

1. **Low Selectivity Filters** - If most rows match, pushdown may not help much
2. **Complex Expressions** - Not all expressions can be pushed down
3. **Function-Based Filters** - Functions on columns may prevent index usage

## Query Examples

### Simple Pushdown

```sql
-- Highly efficient: Pushes filter to storage and uses index if available
SELECT * FROM customers WHERE country = 'US';
```

### Multiple Filter Pushdown

```sql
-- All conditions are pushed down and combined at the storage level
SELECT * FROM orders 
WHERE status = 'shipped' 
  AND order_date > '2022-01-01' 
  AND total > 100;
```

### Join Pushdown

```sql
-- Filters are pushed before the join
SELECT c.name, o.order_date 
FROM customers c
JOIN orders o ON c.id = o.customer_id
WHERE c.country = 'US' AND o.status = 'shipped';
```

### Function Pushdown

```sql
-- LOWER function can be pushed down
SELECT * FROM products
WHERE LOWER(name) LIKE '%organic%';
```

## Implementation Details

OxiBase's expression pushdown is implemented in several components:

- **src/executor/query.rs** - High-level pushdown decisions
- **src/executor/planner.rs** - Query planning with pushdown
- **src/storage/expression/** - Specialized expression types
- **src/storage/mvcc/table.rs** - Storage-level filtering

## Best Practices

To maximize the benefits of expression pushdown:

1. **Use direct column references** - Avoid functions on indexed columns in WHERE clauses
2. **Create appropriate indexes** - Indexes enable better pushdown optimizations
3. **Use simple predicates** - Simple expressions are more likely to be pushed down
4. **Monitor query performance** - Use execution timing to verify optimization effectiveness
5. **Combine multiple conditions** - AND conditions can be pushed down effectively

## Advanced Techniques

### Custom Expressions

OxiBase allows for specialized expression types:

```sql
-- Range expressions are highly optimized
SELECT * FROM time_series 
WHERE timestamp BETWEEN '2022-01-01' AND '2022-01-31';
```

### Combined Index and Expression Pushdown

When expressions match available indexes:

```sql
-- With a composite index on (status, order_date), this is very efficient
SELECT * FROM orders 
WHERE status = 'shipped' AND order_date > '2022-01-01';
```

### Function Index Pushdown

When functions are used in filtering:

```sql
-- If an index exists on LOWER(email), this pushdown is efficient
SELECT * FROM users WHERE LOWER(email) = 'user@example.com';
```
