docs/_docs/architecture/index.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: "Architecture"
has_children: true
nav_order: 2
---

# Architecture

Learn about the internal architecture of OxiBase, including storage engines, indexing, MVCC, and transaction isolation.

## Purpose and Scope

This section describes the high-level architecture of OxiBase: its layered structure, major components, module organization, and how data flows through the system during query execution. It provides a conceptual map of the codebase to help developers understand where different functionality lives and how the pieces fit together.

For details on using OxiBase as a library or CLI tool, see [Getting Started](../getting-started/index.md). For implementation details of specific subsystems, see the [Storage Engine](storage-engine.md), [MVCC Implementation](mvcc-implementation.md), and related pages.

## Three-Tier Layered Architecture

OxiBase follows a classic three-tier database architecture with clear separation of concerns:

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Public API Layer"
        Database["Database<br/>(api/database.rs)"]
        Transaction["Transaction<br/>(api/transaction.rs)"]
        Rows["Rows<br/>(api/rows.rs)"]
    end
    
    subgraph "Executor Layer"
        Executor["Executor<br/>(executor/mod.rs)"]
        QueryPlanner["QueryPlanner<br/>(executor/planner.rs)"]
        Optimizer["Optimizer<br/>(optimizer/mod.rs)"]
        ExprVM["ExprVM<br/>(executor/expression/vm.rs)"]
        FunctionRegistry["FunctionRegistry<br/>(functions/registry.rs)"]
    end
    
    subgraph "Storage Layer"
        MVCCEngine["MVCCEngine<br/>(storage/mvcc/engine.rs)"]
        VersionStore["VersionStore<br/>(storage/mvcc/version_store.rs)"]
        TransactionRegistry["TransactionRegistry<br/>(storage/mvcc/transaction_registry.rs)"]
        BTreeIndex["BTreeIndex<br/>(storage/index/btree.rs)"]
        HashIndex["HashIndex<br/>(storage/index/hash.rs)"]
        BitmapIndex["BitmapIndex<br/>(storage/index/bitmap.rs)"]
        WALManager["WALManager<br/>(storage/persistence/wal.rs)"]
    end
    
    Database -->|"execute/query"| Executor
    Transaction -->|"execute/query"| Executor
    Executor -->|"parse"| Parser["Parser<br/>(parser/mod.rs)"]
    Executor -->|"plan"| QueryPlanner
    QueryPlanner -->|"optimize"| Optimizer
    Executor -->|"eval expressions"| ExprVM
    ExprVM -->|"call functions"| FunctionRegistry
    Executor -->|"read/write"| MVCCEngine
    MVCCEngine -->|"manage versions"| VersionStore
    MVCCEngine -->|"track transactions"| TransactionRegistry
    VersionStore -->|"index data"| BTreeIndex
    VersionStore -->|"index data"| HashIndex
    VersionStore -->|"index data"| BitmapIndex
    MVCCEngine -->|"persist changes"| WALManager
    
    Database -->|"return results"| Rows
    Transaction -->|"return results"| Rows
```

### API Layer

The API layer provides the user-facing interface for interacting with OxiBase. It handles connection management, transaction lifecycle, and result streaming.

**Key Components:**
- `Database` - Entry point for opening databases and executing queries (api/database.rs)
- `Transaction` - Manages ACID transaction boundaries with commit/rollback (api/transaction.rs)
- `Rows` - Iterator for streaming query results with type conversion (api/rows.rs)
- `Statement` - Prepared statement interface with parameter binding (api/statement.rs)

The API layer delegates SQL parsing and execution to the Executor layer but handles connection pooling, DSN parsing, and result formatting.

### Executor Layer

The Executor layer is responsible for transforming SQL into results. It contains the query execution pipeline: parsing, planning, optimization, and execution.

**Key Components:**
- `Executor` - Orchestrates query execution across all statement types (executor/mod.rs)
- `QueryPlanner` - Generates logical query plans from AST (executor/planner.rs)
- `Optimizer` - Cost-based query optimizer with statistics (optimizer/mod.rs)
- `ExprVM` - Stack-based bytecode VM for expression evaluation (executor/expression/vm.rs)
- `FunctionRegistry` - Registry of 101+ built-in SQL functions (functions/registry.rs)

Specialized execution engines handle complex SQL features:
- Query executor for SELECT statements (executor/query.rs)
- Aggregation engine for GROUP BY/ROLLUP/CUBE (executor/aggregate.rs)
- Window function engine for OVER clauses (executor/window.rs)
- Subquery engine for correlated/uncorrelated subqueries (executor/subquery.rs)
- CTE engine for WITH clauses including recursive CTEs (executor/cte.rs)
- DDL executor for schema changes (executor/ddl.rs)

### Storage Layer

The Storage layer implements multi-version concurrency control (MVCC), indexing, and persistence. It provides transactional isolation while allowing concurrent reads and writes.

**Key Components:**
- `MVCCEngine` - Main storage engine coordinating transactions and persistence (storage/mvcc/engine.rs)
- `VersionStore` - Manages version chains for each table row (storage/mvcc/version_store.rs)
- `TransactionRegistry` - Tracks active transactions for visibility checking (storage/mvcc/transaction_registry.rs)
- `BTreeIndex` - Range-queryable B-tree index (storage/index/btree.rs)
- `HashIndex` - O(1) equality lookup hash index (storage/index/hash.rs)
- `BitmapIndex` - Compressed bitmap index for low-cardinality columns (storage/index/bitmap.rs)
- `WALManager` - Write-ahead log for durability and crash recovery (storage/persistence/wal.rs)
- `PersistenceManager` - Snapshot creation and restoration (storage/persistence/manager.rs)

## Module Organization

The codebase is organized into distinct modules with minimal cross-dependencies:

```mermaid
graph LR
    api["api/"]
    core["core/"]
    parser["parser/"]
    planner["planner/"]
    optimizer["optimizer/"]
    executor["executor/"]
    functions["functions/"]
    storage["storage/"]
    common["common/"]
    
    api --> executor
    api --> storage
    api --> core
    
    executor --> parser
    executor --> optimizer
    executor --> functions
    executor --> storage
    executor --> core
    
    optimizer --> planner
    optimizer --> core
    
    planner --> parser
    planner --> core
    
    parser --> core
    
    storage --> core
    
    functions --> core
    
    executor --> common
    storage --> common
```

**Module Descriptions:**

| Module | Purpose | Key Files |
|--------|---------|-----------|
| `api/` | Public database interface | `database.rs`, `transaction.rs`, `rows.rs` |
| `core/` | Core types and abstractions | `value.rs`, `row.rs`, `schema.rs`, `error.rs` |
| `parser/` | SQL lexer and parser | `lexer.rs`, `parser.rs`, `ast.rs` |
| `planner/` | Query planning | `planner.rs` |
| `optimizer/` | Cost-based optimization | `mod.rs`, `stats.rs`, `aqe.rs` |
| `executor/` | Query execution | `query.rs`, `aggregate.rs`, `window.rs`, `subquery.rs`, `cte.rs` |
| `functions/` | Built-in SQL functions | `scalar/`, `aggregate/`, `window/` |
| `storage/` | MVCC storage engine | `mvcc/`, `index/`, `persistence/` |
| `common/` | Shared utilities | `buffer_pool.rs`, `int64_map.rs`, `version.rs` |

## Query Execution Data Flow

The following diagram shows how a SQL query flows through the system, from API entry to result streaming:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Client["Client Application"]
    
    Client -->|"SQL + params"| Database["Database::query()"]
    
    Database -->|"create"| ExecCtx["ExecutionContext<br/>(executor/context.rs)"]
    
    Database -->|"delegate"| Executor["Executor::execute()"]
    
    Executor -->|"tokenize"| Lexer["Lexer<br/>(parser/lexer.rs)"]
    
    Lexer -->|"tokens"| Parser["Parser<br/>(parser/parser.rs)"]
    
    Parser -->|"AST"| Router{Statement Type?}
    
    Router -->|"SELECT"| SelectExec["Executor::execute_select()"]
    Router -->|"INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE"| DMLExec["Executor::execute_dml()"]
    Router -->|"CREATE/DROP/ALTER"| DDLExec["Executor::execute_ddl()"]
    
    SelectExec --> FeatureDetect{Query Features?}
    
    FeatureDetect -->|"WITH"| CTEEngine["CTEExecutor<br/>(executor/cte.rs)"]
    FeatureDetect -->|"Subquery"| SubqueryEngine["SubqueryExecutor<br/>(executor/subquery.rs)"]
    FeatureDetect -->|"GROUP BY"| AggEngine["AggregateExecutor<br/>(executor/aggregate.rs)"]
    FeatureDetect -->|"OVER"| WindowEngine["WindowExecutor<br/>(executor/window.rs)"]
    
    CTEEngine --> Optimize["Optimizer<br/>(optimizer/mod.rs)"]
    SubqueryEngine --> Optimize
    AggEngine --> Optimize
    WindowEngine --> Optimize
    FeatureDetect -->|"Simple"| Optimize
    
    Optimize --> ScanStrategy{Scan Type?}
    
    ScanStrategy -->|"PK lookup"| DirectLookup["VersionStore::get()"]
    ScanStrategy -->|"Index"| IndexScan["Index::scan()"]
    ScanStrategy -->|"Full table"| TableScan["VersionStore::scan()"]
    
    DirectLookup --> ExprEval["ExprVM::execute()<br/>(executor/expression/vm.rs)"]
    IndexScan --> ExprEval
    TableScan --> ExprEval
    
    ExprEval --> MVCCCheck["VersionStore::is_visible()"]
    
    MVCCCheck -->|"visible rows"| ResultBuilder["Build QueryResult"]
    
    ResultBuilder --> Rows["Rows Iterator"]
    
    Rows --> Client
    
    DMLExec --> WAL["WALManager::log_entry()"]
    DDLExec --> WAL
```

**Key Execution Steps:**

1. **Parsing:** parser/lexer.rs tokenizes the SQL string, parser/parser.rs builds an AST
2. **Context Creation:** executor/context.rs creates an ExecutionContext with parameters, timeout, and cancellation token
3. **Feature Detection:** executor/query.rs checks for CTEs, subqueries, aggregation, or window functions
4. **Optimization:** optimizer/mod.rs applies predicate pushdown, index selection, and join reordering
5. **Scan Execution:** storage/mvcc/version_store.rs scans data, checking MVCC visibility
6. **Expression Evaluation:** executor/expression/vm.rs evaluates WHERE clauses, SELECT expressions, and function calls
7. **Result Building:** Specialized result wrappers handle filtering, projection, ordering, and limiting
8. **Streaming:** api/rows.rs provides iterator interface for result consumption

## Core Type System

OxiBase uses a strongly-typed value system with runtime type checking:

```mermaid
graph TB
    Value["Value<br/>(core/value.rs)"]
    
    Value -->|"variants"| Integer["Integer(i64)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Float["Float(f64)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Text["Text(Arc&lt;str&gt;)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Boolean["Boolean(bool)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Timestamp["Timestamp(DateTime)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Json["Json(Arc&lt;str&gt;)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Null["Null"]
    
    Row["Row<br/>(core/row.rs)"] -->|"contains"| Value
    
    Schema["Schema<br/>(core/schema.rs)"] -->|"defines"| SchemaColumn["SchemaColumn"]
    
    SchemaColumn -->|"type"| DataType["DataType"]
    SchemaColumn -->|"constraints"| Constraints["Constraints<br/>(nullable, unique, pk)"]
    SchemaColumn -->|"indexes"| IndexEntry["IndexEntry<br/>(index type, columns)"]
    
    DataType -->|"types"| IntegerType["INTEGER"]
    DataType -->|"types"| FloatType["FLOAT"]
    DataType -->|"types"| TextType["TEXT"]
    DataType -->|"types"| BooleanType["BOOLEAN"]
    DataType -->|"types"| TimestampType["TIMESTAMP"]
    DataType -->|"types"| JsonType["JSON"]
```

**Type Definitions:**
- `Value` - Tagged union representing SQL values (core/value.rs)
- `Row` - Vector of `Value` objects representing a table row (core/row.rs)
- `Schema` - Table metadata including columns and indexes (core/schema.rs)
- `DataType` - Enum of supported SQL types (core/types.rs)

Commit message:

fix: Rename OxiBase to Oxibase in documentation and code
- Replace all occurrences of "OxiBase" with "Oxibase" case-sensitively across README.md, CHANGELOG.md, docs/, examples/, tests/, CONTRIBUTING.md, and other files

Signed-off-by: Gabriel de Maeztu <gabriel.maeztu@gmail.com>

docs/_docs/architecture/index.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: "Architecture"
has_children: true
nav_order: 2
---

# Architecture

Learn about the internal architecture of Oxibase, including storage engines, indexing, MVCC, and transaction isolation.

## Purpose and Scope

This section describes the high-level architecture of Oxibase: its layered structure, major components, module organization, and how data flows through the system during query execution. It provides a conceptual map of the codebase to help developers understand where different functionality lives and how the pieces fit together.

For details on using Oxibase as a library or CLI tool, see [Getting Started](../getting-started/index.md). For implementation details of specific subsystems, see the [Storage Engine](storage-engine.md), [MVCC Implementation](mvcc-implementation.md), and related pages.

## Three-Tier Layered Architecture

Oxibase follows a classic three-tier database architecture with clear separation of concerns:

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Public API Layer"
        Database["Database<br/>(api/database.rs)"]
        Transaction["Transaction<br/>(api/transaction.rs)"]
        Rows["Rows<br/>(api/rows.rs)"]
    end
    
    subgraph "Executor Layer"
        Executor["Executor<br/>(executor/mod.rs)"]
        QueryPlanner["QueryPlanner<br/>(executor/planner.rs)"]
        Optimizer["Optimizer<br/>(optimizer/mod.rs)"]
        ExprVM["ExprVM<br/>(executor/expression/vm.rs)"]
        FunctionRegistry["FunctionRegistry<br/>(functions/registry.rs)"]
    end
    
    subgraph "Storage Layer"
        MVCCEngine["MVCCEngine<br/>(storage/mvcc/engine.rs)"]
        VersionStore["VersionStore<br/>(storage/mvcc/version_store.rs)"]
        TransactionRegistry["TransactionRegistry<br/>(storage/mvcc/transaction_registry.rs)"]
        BTreeIndex["BTreeIndex<br/>(storage/index/btree.rs)"]
        HashIndex["HashIndex<br/>(storage/index/hash.rs)"]
        BitmapIndex["BitmapIndex<br/>(storage/index/bitmap.rs)"]
        WALManager["WALManager<br/>(storage/persistence/wal.rs)"]
    end
    
    Database -->|"execute/query"| Executor
    Transaction -->|"execute/query"| Executor
    Executor -->|"parse"| Parser["Parser<br/>(parser/mod.rs)"]
    Executor -->|"plan"| QueryPlanner
    QueryPlanner -->|"optimize"| Optimizer
    Executor -->|"eval expressions"| ExprVM
    ExprVM -->|"call functions"| FunctionRegistry
    Executor -->|"read/write"| MVCCEngine
    MVCCEngine -->|"manage versions"| VersionStore
    MVCCEngine -->|"track transactions"| TransactionRegistry
    VersionStore -->|"index data"| BTreeIndex
    VersionStore -->|"index data"| HashIndex
    VersionStore -->|"index data"| BitmapIndex
    MVCCEngine -->|"persist changes"| WALManager
    
    Database -->|"return results"| Rows
    Transaction -->|"return results"| Rows
```

### API Layer

The API layer provides the user-facing interface for interacting with Oxibase. It handles connection management, transaction lifecycle, and result streaming.

**Key Components:**
- `Database` - Entry point for opening databases and executing queries (api/database.rs)
- `Transaction` - Manages ACID transaction boundaries with commit/rollback (api/transaction.rs)
- `Rows` - Iterator for streaming query results with type conversion (api/rows.rs)
- `Statement` - Prepared statement interface with parameter binding (api/statement.rs)

The API layer delegates SQL parsing and execution to the Executor layer but handles connection pooling, DSN parsing, and result formatting.

### Executor Layer

The Executor layer is responsible for transforming SQL into results. It contains the query execution pipeline: parsing, planning, optimization, and execution.

**Key Components:**
- `Executor` - Orchestrates query execution across all statement types (executor/mod.rs)
- `QueryPlanner` - Generates logical query plans from AST (executor/planner.rs)
- `Optimizer` - Cost-based query optimizer with statistics (optimizer/mod.rs)
- `ExprVM` - Stack-based bytecode VM for expression evaluation (executor/expression/vm.rs)
- `FunctionRegistry` - Registry of 101+ built-in SQL functions (functions/registry.rs)

Specialized execution engines handle complex SQL features:
- Query executor for SELECT statements (executor/query.rs)
- Aggregation engine for GROUP BY/ROLLUP/CUBE (executor/aggregate.rs)
- Window function engine for OVER clauses (executor/window.rs)
- Subquery engine for correlated/uncorrelated subqueries (executor/subquery.rs)
- CTE engine for WITH clauses including recursive CTEs (executor/cte.rs)
- DDL executor for schema changes (executor/ddl.rs)

### Storage Layer

The Storage layer implements multi-version concurrency control (MVCC), indexing, and persistence. It provides transactional isolation while allowing concurrent reads and writes.

**Key Components:**
- `MVCCEngine` - Main storage engine coordinating transactions and persistence (storage/mvcc/engine.rs)
- `VersionStore` - Manages version chains for each table row (storage/mvcc/version_store.rs)
- `TransactionRegistry` - Tracks active transactions for visibility checking (storage/mvcc/transaction_registry.rs)
- `BTreeIndex` - Range-queryable B-tree index (storage/index/btree.rs)
- `HashIndex` - O(1) equality lookup hash index (storage/index/hash.rs)
- `BitmapIndex` - Compressed bitmap index for low-cardinality columns (storage/index/bitmap.rs)
- `WALManager` - Write-ahead log for durability and crash recovery (storage/persistence/wal.rs)
- `PersistenceManager` - Snapshot creation and restoration (storage/persistence/manager.rs)

## Module Organization

The codebase is organized into distinct modules with minimal cross-dependencies:

```mermaid
graph LR
    api["api/"]
    core["core/"]
    parser["parser/"]
    planner["planner/"]
    optimizer["optimizer/"]
    executor["executor/"]
    functions["functions/"]
    storage["storage/"]
    common["common/"]
    
    api --> executor
    api --> storage
    api --> core
    
    executor --> parser
    executor --> optimizer
    executor --> functions
    executor --> storage
    executor --> core
    
    optimizer --> planner
    optimizer --> core
    
    planner --> parser
    planner --> core
    
    parser --> core
    
    storage --> core
    
    functions --> core
    
    executor --> common
    storage --> common
```

**Module Descriptions:**

| Module | Purpose | Key Files |
|--------|---------|-----------|
| `api/` | Public database interface | `database.rs`, `transaction.rs`, `rows.rs` |
| `core/` | Core types and abstractions | `value.rs`, `row.rs`, `schema.rs`, `error.rs` |
| `parser/` | SQL lexer and parser | `lexer.rs`, `parser.rs`, `ast.rs` |
| `planner/` | Query planning | `planner.rs` |
| `optimizer/` | Cost-based optimization | `mod.rs`, `stats.rs`, `aqe.rs` |
| `executor/` | Query execution | `query.rs`, `aggregate.rs`, `window.rs`, `subquery.rs`, `cte.rs` |
| `functions/` | Built-in SQL functions | `scalar/`, `aggregate/`, `window/` |
| `storage/` | MVCC storage engine | `mvcc/`, `index/`, `persistence/` |
| `common/` | Shared utilities | `buffer_pool.rs`, `int64_map.rs`, `version.rs` |

## Query Execution Data Flow

The following diagram shows how a SQL query flows through the system, from API entry to result streaming:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Client["Client Application"]
    
    Client -->|"SQL + params"| Database["Database::query()"]
    
    Database -->|"create"| ExecCtx["ExecutionContext<br/>(executor/context.rs)"]
    
    Database -->|"delegate"| Executor["Executor::execute()"]
    
    Executor -->|"tokenize"| Lexer["Lexer<br/>(parser/lexer.rs)"]
    
    Lexer -->|"tokens"| Parser["Parser<br/>(parser/parser.rs)"]
    
    Parser -->|"AST"| Router{Statement Type?}
    
    Router -->|"SELECT"| SelectExec["Executor::execute_select()"]
    Router -->|"INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE"| DMLExec["Executor::execute_dml()"]
    Router -->|"CREATE/DROP/ALTER"| DDLExec["Executor::execute_ddl()"]
    
    SelectExec --> FeatureDetect{Query Features?}
    
    FeatureDetect -->|"WITH"| CTEEngine["CTEExecutor<br/>(executor/cte.rs)"]
    FeatureDetect -->|"Subquery"| SubqueryEngine["SubqueryExecutor<br/>(executor/subquery.rs)"]
    FeatureDetect -->|"GROUP BY"| AggEngine["AggregateExecutor<br/>(executor/aggregate.rs)"]
    FeatureDetect -->|"OVER"| WindowEngine["WindowExecutor<br/>(executor/window.rs)"]
    
    CTEEngine --> Optimize["Optimizer<br/>(optimizer/mod.rs)"]
    SubqueryEngine --> Optimize
    AggEngine --> Optimize
    WindowEngine --> Optimize
    FeatureDetect -->|"Simple"| Optimize
    
    Optimize --> ScanStrategy{Scan Type?}
    
    ScanStrategy -->|"PK lookup"| DirectLookup["VersionStore::get()"]
    ScanStrategy -->|"Index"| IndexScan["Index::scan()"]
    ScanStrategy -->|"Full table"| TableScan["VersionStore::scan()"]
    
    DirectLookup --> ExprEval["ExprVM::execute()<br/>(executor/expression/vm.rs)"]
    IndexScan --> ExprEval
    TableScan --> ExprEval
    
    ExprEval --> MVCCCheck["VersionStore::is_visible()"]
    
    MVCCCheck -->|"visible rows"| ResultBuilder["Build QueryResult"]
    
    ResultBuilder --> Rows["Rows Iterator"]
    
    Rows --> Client
    
    DMLExec --> WAL["WALManager::log_entry()"]
    DDLExec --> WAL
```

**Key Execution Steps:**

1. **Parsing:** parser/lexer.rs tokenizes the SQL string, parser/parser.rs builds an AST
2. **Context Creation:** executor/context.rs creates an ExecutionContext with parameters, timeout, and cancellation token
3. **Feature Detection:** executor/query.rs checks for CTEs, subqueries, aggregation, or window functions
4. **Optimization:** optimizer/mod.rs applies predicate pushdown, index selection, and join reordering
5. **Scan Execution:** storage/mvcc/version_store.rs scans data, checking MVCC visibility
6. **Expression Evaluation:** executor/expression/vm.rs evaluates WHERE clauses, SELECT expressions, and function calls
7. **Result Building:** Specialized result wrappers handle filtering, projection, ordering, and limiting
8. **Streaming:** api/rows.rs provides iterator interface for result consumption

## Core Type System

Oxibase uses a strongly-typed value system with runtime type checking:

```mermaid
graph TB
    Value["Value<br/>(core/value.rs)"]
    
    Value -->|"variants"| Integer["Integer(i64)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Float["Float(f64)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Text["Text(Arc&lt;str&gt;)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Boolean["Boolean(bool)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Timestamp["Timestamp(DateTime)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Json["Json(Arc&lt;str&gt;)"]
    Value -->|"variants"| Null["Null"]
    
    Row["Row<br/>(core/row.rs)"] -->|"contains"| Value
    
    Schema["Schema<br/>(core/schema.rs)"] -->|"defines"| SchemaColumn["SchemaColumn"]
    
    SchemaColumn -->|"type"| DataType["DataType"]
    SchemaColumn -->|"constraints"| Constraints["Constraints<br/>(nullable, unique, pk)"]
    SchemaColumn -->|"indexes"| IndexEntry["IndexEntry<br/>(index type, columns)"]
    
    DataType -->|"types"| IntegerType["INTEGER"]
    DataType -->|"types"| FloatType["FLOAT"]
    DataType -->|"types"| TextType["TEXT"]
    DataType -->|"types"| BooleanType["BOOLEAN"]
    DataType -->|"types"| TimestampType["TIMESTAMP"]
    DataType -->|"types"| JsonType["JSON"]
```

**Type Definitions:**
- `Value` - Tagged union representing SQL values (core/value.rs)
- `Row` - Vector of `Value` objects representing a table row (core/row.rs)
- `Schema` - Table metadata including columns and indexes (core/schema.rs)
- `DataType` - Enum of supported SQL types (core/types.rs)
