docs/_docs/architecture/transaction-isolation.md, before:

---
layout: doc
title: Transaction Isolation
category: Architecture
order: 5
---

# Transaction Isolation in Stoolap

Stoolap implements Multi-Version Concurrency Control (MVCC) to provide transaction isolation with minimal locking overhead. This document explains how transactions work in Stoolap and the available isolation levels.

## Implemented Isolation Levels

Stoolap currently supports two isolation levels:

1. **READ COMMITTED** - The default isolation level where a transaction only sees data that has been committed by other transactions. Each query within the transaction may see different versions of data as other transactions commit.

2. **SNAPSHOT** (also known as REPEATABLE READ) - Provides a consistent view of the database as it was when the transaction started. All queries within the transaction see the same snapshot of data, regardless of concurrent commits by other transactions.

## Setting Isolation Levels

Stoolap provides multiple ways to control transaction isolation levels:

### Connection-level Default Isolation Level

Set the default isolation level for the current connection using `SET ISOLATIONLEVEL`:

```sql
-- Set connection default to READ COMMITTED (default)
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'READ COMMITTED';

-- Set connection default to SNAPSHOT
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'SNAPSHOT';
```

This setting affects:
- **Auto-commit transactions** - Queries executed without an explicit transaction
- **Transactions started with BEGIN** - When no isolation level is specified

### Transaction-specific Isolation Level

Override the connection's default isolation level for a specific transaction:

```sql
-- Start a transaction with READ COMMITTED isolation level
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED;

-- Start a transaction with SNAPSHOT isolation level  
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL SNAPSHOT;
```

### Programmatic Transaction Control

When using the Stoolap driver programmatically:

```go
// Use connection default (affected by SET ISOLATIONLEVEL)
tx, err := db.Begin()

// Explicitly specify isolation level (ignores SET ISOLATIONLEVEL)
tx, err := db.BeginTx(context.Background(), &sql.TxOptions{
    Isolation: sql.LevelSnapshot,
})
```

**Important**: Transaction-specific isolation levels always take precedence over the connection default set by `SET ISOLATIONLEVEL`.

## MVCC Implementation

Stoolap's MVCC implementation uses a combination of techniques to provide efficient transaction isolation:

### Transaction IDs and Timestamps

- Each transaction is assigned a unique transaction ID (`txnID`)
- Begin timestamps are assigned when the transaction starts
- Commit timestamps are assigned when the transaction commits
- Timestamps are used to determine data visibility between transactions

### Row Versioning

- Each row maintains a full version chain linked via `prev` pointers
- Each version includes:
  - Creation transaction ID
  - Deletion transaction ID (if applicable)
  - Column values at that version
  - Pointer to previous version
- Version chains enable concurrent transactions to see different historical versions
- New versions are always created (immutability) - existing versions never modified

### Visibility Rules

The core visibility rules in Stoolap determine which row versions are visible to a transaction:

#### READ COMMITTED Mode

In READ COMMITTED mode (the default):
- A transaction sees its own uncommitted changes
- A transaction sees all changes committed by other transactions at the time of each query
- A transaction never sees uncommitted changes from other transactions

#### SNAPSHOT Mode

In SNAPSHOT mode:
- A transaction sees its own uncommitted changes
- A transaction sees only changes that were committed before the transaction started
- Changes committed by other transactions after this transaction started are not visible

## Transaction Operations

### Beginning a Transaction

A transaction can be started with various forms of the `BEGIN` statement:

```sql
-- Start a transaction with default isolation level (READ COMMITTED)
BEGIN;

-- Alternative syntax
BEGIN TRANSACTION;

-- Start with specific isolation level
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED;
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL SNAPSHOT;
```

Transactions can also start implicitly with the first statement execution if no explicit transaction is active.

### Performing Operations

Within a transaction, you can perform the following operations:

- **SELECT** - Reads data visible to the transaction
- **INSERT** - Creates new row versions
- **UPDATE** - Creates new row versions and marks old versions as deleted
- **DELETE** - Marks row versions as deleted

### Committing a Transaction

Transactions are committed with the `COMMIT` statement:

```sql
COMMIT;
```

During commit:
1. A commit timestamp is assigned to the transaction
2. All changes become visible to other transactions (based on their isolation level)
3. The transaction is removed from the active transactions list
4. If a transaction-specific isolation level was set, it reverts to the session default

### Rolling Back a Transaction

Transactions can be rolled back with the `ROLLBACK` statement:

```sql
ROLLBACK;
```

During rollback:
1. All changes made by the transaction are discarded
2. The transaction is removed from the active transactions list
3. If a transaction-specific isolation level was set, it reverts to the session default

## Concurrency Control

Stoolap uses optimistic concurrency control with lock-free design:

1. Transactions proceed without acquiring any locks
2. Multiple writers can work concurrently on different rows
3. At commit time, the system checks for write-write conflicts
4. If a conflict is detected, the transaction is aborted

### Write-Write Conflict Detection

For SNAPSHOT isolation, Stoolap implements write-write conflict detection to prevent lost updates:

- When a transaction begins, it records a begin timestamp
- When rows are modified, write timestamps are tracked
- At commit time, if any row being written has a write timestamp greater than the transaction's begin timestamp, a conflict is detected
- The transaction is aborted with: `transaction aborted due to write-write conflict`

This ensures that concurrent transactions cannot overwrite each other's changes without detection.

### Types of Conflicts

Conflicts are detected in the following scenarios:

- **Write-Write Conflicts** (SNAPSHOT only) - When two transactions modify the same row
- **Primary Key Conflicts** - When two transactions try to insert rows with the same primary key
- **Unique Constraint Conflicts** - When an insert or update violates a unique constraint

## Implementation Details

The transaction isolation in Stoolap is implemented in the following key components:

- `src/storage/mvcc/engine.rs` - Contains the transaction creation and management logic
- `src/storage/mvcc/transaction.rs` - Implements the transaction interface with isolation level management
- `src/storage/mvcc/version_store.rs` - Manages versioned data
- `src/executor/query.rs` - Handles SQL statement execution and isolation level parsing

## Best Practices

- Transactions should be kept short to minimize conflicts
- Use explicit transactions for operations that need to be atomic
- Consider your specific application's needs when deciding between READ COMMITTED and SNAPSHOT:
  - **READ COMMITTED** is good for most OLTP workloads, offering better concurrency
  - **SNAPSHOT** is useful for analytical queries that need a consistent point-in-time view
- Use session-wide isolation levels for applications with consistent isolation requirements
- Use transaction-specific isolation levels when you need different isolation guarantees for specific operations

## Examples

### Basic Transaction with Default Isolation

```sql
BEGIN;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id = 1;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 100 WHERE id = 2;
COMMIT;
```

### Transaction with Specific Isolation Level

```sql
-- Use SNAPSHOT isolation for a consistent analytical query
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL SNAPSHOT;
SELECT category, SUM(amount) FROM sales GROUP BY category;
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM products WHERE active = true;
COMMIT;
```

### Session-wide Isolation Level Setting

```sql
-- Set session to use SNAPSHOT isolation by default
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'SNAPSHOT';

-- All subsequent transactions will use SNAPSHOT isolation
BEGIN;
SELECT * FROM inventory WHERE quantity > 0;
UPDATE inventory SET quantity = quantity - 1 WHERE product_id = 123;
COMMIT;

-- Reset to default
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'READ COMMITTED';
```

### Transaction with Rollback

```sql
BEGIN;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id = 1;
-- Something went wrong
ROLLBACK;
```

### Write-Write Conflict Example

```sql
-- Connection 1
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'SNAPSHOT';
BEGIN;
SELECT balance FROM accounts WHERE id = 1; -- Returns 1000

-- Connection 2
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'SNAPSHOT';
BEGIN;
SELECT balance FROM accounts WHERE id = 1; -- Returns 1000

-- Connection 1
UPDATE accounts SET balance = 900 WHERE id = 1;
COMMIT; -- Success

-- Connection 2
UPDATE accounts SET balance = 800 WHERE id = 1;
COMMIT; -- Fails with: transaction aborted due to write-write conflict
```

In this example, both transactions read the same initial value (1000) but Connection 2's commit fails because Connection 1 already modified the row after Connection 2's transaction began.

## Performance Characteristics

### Lock-Free Design

- **No table-level locks** - SNAPSHOT isolation commits without global synchronization
- **Concurrent writers** - Multiple transactions can commit simultaneously
- **Version chain traversal** - Efficient backward traversal to find visible versions
- **Automatic cleanup** - Old versions garbage collected when no longer needed

### Memory Management

- Version chains built from WAL replay during recovery
- Only latest version persisted to disk snapshots
- Old versions automatically cleaned up based on active transaction needs

## Limitations

- Long-running transactions prevent garbage collection of old versions
- Extremely high concurrency on the same rows may lead to frequent conflicts in SNAPSHOT isolation
- Savepoints are not currently supported
- Each connection maintains its own default isolation level set by `SET ISOLATIONLEVEL`

Commit message:

feat: rebrand project from stoolap to oxibase
- Rename package name, library, and binary from stoolap to oxibase
- Update all source code imports and references across src/, tests/, examples/
- Modify CLI output, help text, version strings, and command names
- Update documentation, README, CONTRIBUTING, and website configs
- Change repository URLs, homepage, and documentation links
- Preserve original copyrights, append "Copyright 2025 OxiBase Contributors"
- Update test data entries and example outputs
- Refresh Cargo.lock with new package metadata
- Ensure all builds and tests pass post-rebrand

This completes the full project rebranding while maintaining functionality and respecting copyright preservation requirements.

Signed-off-by: Gabriel de Maeztu <gabriel.maeztu@gmail.com>

docs/_docs/architecture/transaction-isolation.md, after:

---
layout: doc
title: Transaction Isolation
category: Architecture
order: 5
---

# Transaction Isolation in OxiBase

OxiBase implements Multi-Version Concurrency Control (MVCC) to provide transaction isolation with minimal locking overhead. This document explains how transactions work in OxiBase and the available isolation levels.

## Implemented Isolation Levels

OxiBase currently supports two isolation levels:

1. **READ COMMITTED** - The default isolation level where a transaction only sees data that has been committed by other transactions. Each query within the transaction may see different versions of data as other transactions commit.

2. **SNAPSHOT** (also known as REPEATABLE READ) - Provides a consistent view of the database as it was when the transaction started. All queries within the transaction see the same snapshot of data, regardless of concurrent commits by other transactions.

## Setting Isolation Levels

OxiBase provides multiple ways to control transaction isolation levels:

### Connection-level Default Isolation Level

Set the default isolation level for the current connection using `SET ISOLATIONLEVEL`:

```sql
-- Set connection default to READ COMMITTED (default)
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'READ COMMITTED';

-- Set connection default to SNAPSHOT
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'SNAPSHOT';
```

This setting affects:
- **Auto-commit transactions** - Queries executed without an explicit transaction
- **Transactions started with BEGIN** - When no isolation level is specified

### Transaction-specific Isolation Level

Override the connection's default isolation level for a specific transaction:

```sql
-- Start a transaction with READ COMMITTED isolation level
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED;

-- Start a transaction with SNAPSHOT isolation level  
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL SNAPSHOT;
```

### Programmatic Transaction Control

When using the OxiBase driver programmatically:

```go
// Use connection default (affected by SET ISOLATIONLEVEL)
tx, err := db.Begin()

// Explicitly specify isolation level (ignores SET ISOLATIONLEVEL)
tx, err := db.BeginTx(context.Background(), &sql.TxOptions{
    Isolation: sql.LevelSnapshot,
})
```

**Important**: Transaction-specific isolation levels always take precedence over the connection default set by `SET ISOLATIONLEVEL`.

## MVCC Implementation

OxiBase's MVCC implementation uses a combination of techniques to provide efficient transaction isolation:

### Transaction IDs and Timestamps

- Each transaction is assigned a unique transaction ID (`txnID`)
- Begin timestamps are assigned when the transaction starts
- Commit timestamps are assigned when the transaction commits
- Timestamps are used to determine data visibility between transactions

### Row Versioning

- Each row maintains a full version chain linked via `prev` pointers
- Each version includes:
  - Creation transaction ID
  - Deletion transaction ID (if applicable)
  - Column values at that version
  - Pointer to previous version
- Version chains enable concurrent transactions to see different historical versions
- New versions are always created (immutability) - existing versions never modified

### Visibility Rules

The core visibility rules in OxiBase determine which row versions are visible to a transaction:

#### READ COMMITTED Mode

In READ COMMITTED mode (the default):
- A transaction sees its own uncommitted changes
- A transaction sees all changes committed by other transactions at the time of each query
- A transaction never sees uncommitted changes from other transactions

#### SNAPSHOT Mode

In SNAPSHOT mode:
- A transaction sees its own uncommitted changes
- A transaction sees only changes that were committed before the transaction started
- Changes committed by other transactions after this transaction started are not visible

## Transaction Operations

### Beginning a Transaction

A transaction can be started with various forms of the `BEGIN` statement:

```sql
-- Start a transaction with default isolation level (READ COMMITTED)
BEGIN;

-- Alternative syntax
BEGIN TRANSACTION;

-- Start with specific isolation level
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED;
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL SNAPSHOT;
```

Transactions can also start implicitly with the first statement execution if no explicit transaction is active.

### Performing Operations

Within a transaction, you can perform the following operations:

- **SELECT** - Reads data visible to the transaction
- **INSERT** - Creates new row versions
- **UPDATE** - Creates new row versions and marks old versions as deleted
- **DELETE** - Marks row versions as deleted

### Committing a Transaction

Transactions are committed with the `COMMIT` statement:

```sql
COMMIT;
```

During commit:
1. A commit timestamp is assigned to the transaction
2. All changes become visible to other transactions (based on their isolation level)
3. The transaction is removed from the active transactions list
4. If a transaction-specific isolation level was set, it reverts to the session default

### Rolling Back a Transaction

Transactions can be rolled back with the `ROLLBACK` statement:

```sql
ROLLBACK;
```

During rollback:
1. All changes made by the transaction are discarded
2. The transaction is removed from the active transactions list
3. If a transaction-specific isolation level was set, it reverts to the session default

## Concurrency Control

OxiBase uses optimistic concurrency control with lock-free design:

1. Transactions proceed without acquiring any locks
2. Multiple writers can work concurrently on different rows
3. At commit time, the system checks for write-write conflicts
4. If a conflict is detected, the transaction is aborted

### Write-Write Conflict Detection

For SNAPSHOT isolation, OxiBase implements write-write conflict detection to prevent lost updates:

- When a transaction begins, it records a begin timestamp
- When rows are modified, write timestamps are tracked
- At commit time, if any row being written has a write timestamp greater than the transaction's begin timestamp, a conflict is detected
- The transaction is aborted with: `transaction aborted due to write-write conflict`

This ensures that concurrent transactions cannot overwrite each other's changes without detection.

### Types of Conflicts

Conflicts are detected in the following scenarios:

- **Write-Write Conflicts** (SNAPSHOT only) - When two transactions modify the same row
- **Primary Key Conflicts** - When two transactions try to insert rows with the same primary key
- **Unique Constraint Conflicts** - When an insert or update violates a unique constraint

## Implementation Details

The transaction isolation in OxiBase is implemented in the following key components:

- `src/storage/mvcc/engine.rs` - Contains the transaction creation and management logic
- `src/storage/mvcc/transaction.rs` - Implements the transaction interface with isolation level management
- `src/storage/mvcc/version_store.rs` - Manages versioned data
- `src/executor/query.rs` - Handles SQL statement execution and isolation level parsing

## Best Practices

- Transactions should be kept short to minimize conflicts
- Use explicit transactions for operations that need to be atomic
- Consider your specific application's needs when deciding between READ COMMITTED and SNAPSHOT:
  - **READ COMMITTED** is good for most OLTP workloads, offering better concurrency
  - **SNAPSHOT** is useful for analytical queries that need a consistent point-in-time view
- Use session-wide isolation levels for applications with consistent isolation requirements
- Use transaction-specific isolation levels when you need different isolation guarantees for specific operations

## Examples

### Basic Transaction with Default Isolation

```sql
BEGIN;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id = 1;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 100 WHERE id = 2;
COMMIT;
```

### Transaction with Specific Isolation Level

```sql
-- Use SNAPSHOT isolation for a consistent analytical query
BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL SNAPSHOT;
SELECT category, SUM(amount) FROM sales GROUP BY category;
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM products WHERE active = true;
COMMIT;
```

### Session-wide Isolation Level Setting

```sql
-- Set session to use SNAPSHOT isolation by default
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'SNAPSHOT';

-- All subsequent transactions will use SNAPSHOT isolation
BEGIN;
SELECT * FROM inventory WHERE quantity > 0;
UPDATE inventory SET quantity = quantity - 1 WHERE product_id = 123;
COMMIT;

-- Reset to default
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'READ COMMITTED';
```

### Transaction with Rollback

```sql
BEGIN;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id = 1;
-- Something went wrong
ROLLBACK;
```

### Write-Write Conflict Example

```sql
-- Connection 1
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'SNAPSHOT';
BEGIN;
SELECT balance FROM accounts WHERE id = 1; -- Returns 1000

-- Connection 2
SET ISOLATIONLEVEL = 'SNAPSHOT';
BEGIN;
SELECT balance FROM accounts WHERE id = 1; -- Returns 1000

-- Connection 1
UPDATE accounts SET balance = 900 WHERE id = 1;
COMMIT; -- Success

-- Connection 2
UPDATE accounts SET balance = 800 WHERE id = 1;
COMMIT; -- Fails with: transaction aborted due to write-write conflict
```

In this example, both transactions read the same initial value (1000) but Connection 2's commit fails because Connection 1 already modified the row after Connection 2's transaction began.

## Performance Characteristics

### Lock-Free Design

- **No table-level locks** - SNAPSHOT isolation commits without global synchronization
- **Concurrent writers** - Multiple transactions can commit simultaneously
- **Version chain traversal** - Efficient backward traversal to find visible versions
- **Automatic cleanup** - Old versions garbage collected when no longer needed

### Memory Management

- Version chains built from WAL replay during recovery
- Only latest version persisted to disk snapshots
- Old versions automatically cleaned up based on active transaction needs

## Limitations

- Long-running transactions prevent garbage collection of old versions
- Extremely high concurrency on the same rows may lead to frequent conflicts in SNAPSHOT isolation
- Savepoints are not currently supported
- Each connection maintains its own default isolation level set by `SET ISOLATIONLEVEL`
