docs/index.md, before:

---
title: Home
layout: default
nav_exclude: true
---

<div style="text-align: center;"><img src="assets/img/logo.svg" alt="Oxibase Logo" style="max-width: 200px; height: auto;"></div>

Oxibase is a relation database operating system (DBOS) that provides full ACID transactions with MVCC, a sophisticated cost-based query optimizer.

- **Multiple Index Types**: B-tree, Hash, and Bitmap indexes with automatic type selection
- **Multi-Column Indexes**: Composite indexes for complex query patterns
- **Parallel Query Execution**: Automatic parallelization using Rayon for large datasets
- **Cost-Based Optimizer**: PostgreSQL-style optimizer with adaptive execution and cardinality feedback
- **Semantic Query Caching**: Intelligent result caching with predicate subsumption
- **Disk Persistence**: WAL and snapshots with crash recovery
- **Rich SQL Support**: Window functions, CTEs (including recursive), subqueries, ROLLUP/CUBE, and 101+ built-in functions

## Roadmap Overview

Oxibase is evolving into a distributed, autonomous database system that bridges embedded logic with global resilience. The roadmap outlines the journey from a single-node, scriptable database to a self-managing, AI-enhanced platform.

**Phase 1: Foundation** - Establishing core capabilities through parallel efforts: embedded scripting languages for stored functions and triggers, declarative schema migrations, TUI manager, web server exposure for REST/GraphQL, Postgres wire protocol server, deterministic simulator, and unikernel compilation. These prepare for horizontal scaling.

**Phase 2: Single Node Efficiency** - Unifying operational needs into Oxibase itself with self-monitoring, multiple storage backends, data lifecycle management, and separation of compute & storage.

**Phase 3: Distributed System** - Achieving infinite horizontal scale and global resilience through multi-master consensus, data rebalancing/sharding, geo-sharding, and gossip protocols.

**Phase 4: The Autonomous Cloud** - The database manages its own physical existence and evolves into an AI platform with autonomous networking, auto-infrastructure management, in-database ML inference, and GPU training.

_Figure 1: Phase 1 Dependency Flow_

```mermaid
graph TD;
    A[Embedded Scripting Languages<br/>Stored functions & triggers<br/>FaaS-like with debugger] --> B[Web Server Exposure<br/>REST/GraphQL endpoints<br/>DML routes, HTML/function execution]
    A --> C[Postgres Wire Protocol Server<br/>Third-party connectivity<br/>Remote control & vertical scaling]
    A --> D[Deterministic Simulator<br/>Failure simulation<br/>Horizontal scaling prep]
    B --> E[Horizontal Scaling<br/>Post-simulator implementation]
    C --> E
    D --> E
    F[Unikernel Compilation<br/>OS-free, bootable images] --> E
```

For detailed information about each phase, see the [full roadmap](getting-started/roadmap).

## Need Help?

If you can't find what you're looking for in the documentation, you can:

- [Open an issue](https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase/issues) on GitHub
- [Join the discussions](https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase/discussions) to ask questions

---

This documentation is under active development. Contributions are welcome!

Commit message:

docs: showcase UDFs in docs and examples, add procedures placeholder
- Add UDF bullet point to main index.md
- Add UDF examples to quickstart tutorial
- Improve user_defined_functions.rs example with multiple backends and named params
- Update user-defined-functions.md to reflect named parameters
- Create placeholder procedures.md page explaining differences with functions
- Update all test examples to use named parameters instead of positional

docs/index.md, after:

---
title: Home
layout: default
nav_exclude: true
---

<div style="text-align: center;"><img src="assets/img/logo.svg" alt="Oxibase Logo" style="max-width: 200px; height: auto;"></div>

Oxibase is a relation database operating system (DBOS) that provides full ACID transactions with MVCC, a sophisticated cost-based query optimizer.

- **Multiple Index Types**: B-tree, Hash, and Bitmap indexes with automatic type selection
- **Multi-Column Indexes**: Composite indexes for complex query patterns
- **Parallel Query Execution**: Automatic parallelization using Rayon for large datasets
- **Cost-Based Optimizer**: PostgreSQL-style optimizer with adaptive execution and cardinality feedback
- **Semantic Query Caching**: Intelligent result caching with predicate subsumption
- **Disk Persistence**: WAL and snapshots with crash recovery
- **Rich SQL Support**: Window functions, CTEs (including recursive), subqueries, ROLLUP/CUBE, and 101+ built-in functions
- **User-Defined Functions**: Extend SQL with custom functions written in Rhai, Python, or JavaScript

## Roadmap Overview

Oxibase is evolving into a distributed, autonomous database system that bridges embedded logic with global resilience. The roadmap outlines the journey from a single-node, scriptable database to a self-managing, AI-enhanced platform.

**Phase 1: Foundation** - Establishing core capabilities through parallel efforts: embedded scripting languages for stored functions and triggers, declarative schema migrations, TUI manager, web server exposure for REST/GraphQL, Postgres wire protocol server, deterministic simulator, and unikernel compilation. These prepare for horizontal scaling.

**Phase 2: Single Node Efficiency** - Unifying operational needs into Oxibase itself with self-monitoring, multiple storage backends, data lifecycle management, and separation of compute & storage.

**Phase 3: Distributed System** - Achieving infinite horizontal scale and global resilience through multi-master consensus, data rebalancing/sharding, geo-sharding, and gossip protocols.

**Phase 4: The Autonomous Cloud** - The database manages its own physical existence and evolves into an AI platform with autonomous networking, auto-infrastructure management, in-database ML inference, and GPU training.

_Figure 1: Phase 1 Dependency Flow_

```mermaid
graph TD;
    A[Embedded Scripting Languages<br/>Stored functions & triggers<br/>FaaS-like with debugger] --> B[Web Server Exposure<br/>REST/GraphQL endpoints<br/>DML routes, HTML/function execution]
    A --> C[Postgres Wire Protocol Server<br/>Third-party connectivity<br/>Remote control & vertical scaling]
    A --> D[Deterministic Simulator<br/>Failure simulation<br/>Horizontal scaling prep]
    B --> E[Horizontal Scaling<br/>Post-simulator implementation]
    C --> E
    D --> E
    F[Unikernel Compilation<br/>OS-free, bootable images] --> E
```

For detailed information about each phase, see the [full roadmap](getting-started/roadmap).

## Need Help?

If you can't find what you're looking for in the documentation, you can:

- [Open an issue](https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase/issues) on GitHub
- [Join the discussions](https://github.com/oxibase/oxibase/discussions) to ask questions

---

This documentation is under active development. Contributions are welcome!
